1.Code::Blocks
	Code::Blocks is a free and open source, cross-platform IDE which supports multiple compilers including GCC, 
Clang and Visual C++. 
It is developed in C++ using wxWidgets as the GUI toolkit. 
Using a plugin architecture, its capabilities and features are defined by the provided plugins. 
Currently, Code::Blocks is oriented towards C, C++, and Fortran. It has a custom build system and optional Make support.


2.Eclipse
	In computer programming, Eclipse is an integrated development environment (IDE). 
It contains a base workspace and an extensible plug-in system for customizing the environment. 
Written mostly in Java, Eclipse can be used to develop applications. 


3.NetBeans
	NetBeans is an integrated development environment (IDE) for developing primarily with Java, 
but also with other languages, in particular PHP, C/C++, and HTML5.
It is also an application platform framework for Java desktop applications and others.
The NetBeans IDE is written in Java and can run on Windows, OS X, Linux, Solaris 
and other platforms supporting a compatible JVM.


4.Oracle Solaris Studio
	The Oracle Solaris Studio, formerly named Sun Studio, Sun WorkShop, Forte Developer, 
and SunPro Compilers, is a compiler suite which is Oracle Corporation's flagship software development product 
for the operating systems Solaris and Linux. 
The Oracle Solaris Studio software delivers optimizing compilers for C, C++, and Fortran, libraries, 
and performance analysis, and debugging tools for Solaris on SPARC, and both Solaris and Linux on x86/x64 platforms, 
including multi-core systems.
The Oracle Studio compiler and development tools software suite is downloadable at no charge from an 
Oracle website however there are many security and functionality patch updates which are only available with 
a support contract from Oracle.


5.Visual Studio
	Microsoft Visual Studio is an integrated development environment (IDE) from Microsoft. It is used to develop console     
and graphical user interface applications along with Windows Forms or WPF applications, web sites, web applications,     
web services, and also Windows Store apps in both native code together with managed code for all platforms supported     
by Microsoft.